p. Linaro releases monthly binary images of UEFI, based on the Tiaoncore project.

h2. Tianocore baselines

p. The Linaro UEFI tree is based on the following upstream versions of code from Tianocore:

* edk2 at subversion revision 14795


The latest version of the EDK2 code contains support for aarch64 plaforms upstream in addition to the following topic branches:

* linaro-topic-a5
* linaro-topic-a9
* linaro-topic-arndale
* linaro-topic-bds
* linaro-topic-fvp
* linaro-topic-leg
* linaro-topic-misc
* linaro-topic-panda
* linaro-topic-pxeboot
* linaro-topic-tc1
* linaro-topic-tc2

h2. Platform Support

p. Platforms currently supported include:

* Versatile Express A5/A9/TC1/TC2, RTSM A9x4 and A15x1, A15 MPCore, Foundation and FVP Base models.
* Samsung Arndale
* TI Beagleboard
* TI Pandaboard


This release was tested on the Versatile Express Foundation and FVP Base models. It may work on the other supported platforms since no feature changes were added.

h2. Building UEFI

For more instructions on how to build UEFI from source, please see the "LEG wiki build page":https://wiki.linaro.org/LEG/Engineering/Kernel/UEFI/build 

h2. Fixed in this release

p. The following issues were fixed in this release:

None.

h2. Known Issues

p. The following issues were unresolved in this release:

* "LP: #1157372":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1157372 FAT file system crashes when creating new file or directory within the UefiShell or EdkShell (microSD Card)
* "LP: #1166301":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1166301 Arndale port uses an embedded copy of the GIC library
* "LP: #1179461":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1179461 UEFI: TC2: booting from A7 core causes boot failures due to MMC/SD timeouts
* "LP: #1163341":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1163341 Ax88772 drivers assume CPU is Little-Endian
* "LP: #1157203":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1157203 UEFI: TC2: Shell cannot write to SD card when booting from A7 core
* "LP: #1166364":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1166364 UEFI: VExpress 4xA9 support not bindings compliant
* "LP: #1057164":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1057164 Panda UEFI is not ready for real deployment
* "LP: #942155":https://launchpad.net/bugs/942155 UEFI: TC2: copy/paste doesn't work over serial port
* "LP: #1117464":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1117464 UEFI/TFTP: server must provide a filename in DHCPOFFER
* "LP: #1131141":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1131141 UEFI: arndale does not store Boot Device config
* "LP: #1161355":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1161355 Arndale port console should use SerialDxe
* "LP: #1174318":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1174318 SetVirtualAddressMap ASSERT failure in DEBUG build 
* "LP: #1192941":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1192941 Lava : vexpress-tc2-01 and vexpress-tc2-benchmark jobs are running incomplete due to various reasons
* "LP: #1192963":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1192963 UEFI: origen: BSP doesn't compile
* "LP: #1274126":http2://launchpad.net/bugs/1274126 UEFI: stub-kernel TFTP boot test fail

h2. More information

The "LEG UEFI wiki":https://wiki.linaro.org/LEG/Engineering/Kernel/UEFI is a great place to start developing with Linaro's UEFI tree.
