h1. Linaro Stable Kernel (LSK) 13.11 Release for Versatile Express (OpenEmbedded)

p. The Linaro Stable Kernel (LSK) is produced, validated and released by Linaro and is based on the linux stable kernel tree. It is produced to satisfy the requirements of Linaro members. The LSK focuses on quality and stability and is therefore a great basis for member products. It also includes backports of commonly desired features, provided they meet the quality requirements, and also any bug fixes.

p. Linaro releases monthly binary images for the ARM "Versatile Express":http://www.arm.com/products/tools/development-boards/versatile-express/index.php including support for Cortex-A9, Cortex-A5, TC2 (big.LITTLE) CoreTiles and RTSM.

p. For support matters related to ARM hardware or firmware images downloaded from ARM sites, please contact "ARM support":mailto:support@arm.com

p. This release includes Linaro OpenEmbedded for both Versatile Express and Real-Time System Model ("RTSM":http://www.arm.com/products/tools/software-tools/ds-5/rtsm-simulator.php). The images are able to boot A5, A9 and TC2 using UEFI. Sources are also made available so you can build your own images (see the "'Building from Source'":https://releases.linaro.org/13.11/openembedded/vexpress-lsk/#tabs-3 tab).

h2. About the TC2 Engineering Build

This release is based on the Linux v3.10.16 kernel.  As a consequence, almost all of the patches in the ARM Landing Team tree have been rebased and refactored to account for the latest upstream content.

The TC2 CoreTile is the first example of a big.LITTLE system shipped by ARM and serves as a platform for development and test of big.LITTLE software. TC2 contains a tri-core Cortex-A7 cluster and a dual-core Cortex-A15 cluster linked using the CCI-400 coherent interconnect.

The release contains the big.LITTLE MP patchset developed by ARM. This patchset is hosted by Linaro and can be found in the linked "git repository":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=arm/big.LITTLE/mp.git;a=shortlog;h=refs/heads/big-LITTLE-MP-latest.  These patches have been developed and rigorously tested in order to enable the ARM Versatile Express V2P-CA15_A7 CoreTile (TC2) to run in full MP mode. This functionality has been optimised for energy and performance bringing it close to the Cortex-A7 (LITTLE) in energy consumption with near Cortex-A15 (big) performance. The patchset also includes optimizations that provide a considerable performance uplift across a wide range of benchmarks. The functionality introduced by this patchset is stable and ready for use on other platforms. Note that at present this LSK release is the reference point for big.LITTLE MP functionality.

The patches in the big.LITTLE MP patchset are generic and applicable to big.LITTLE systems with minimal porting effort. To ease porting, the patches are also available as an isolated package located "here":https://wiki.linaro.org/ARM/VersatileExpress?action=AttachFile&do=get&target=big-LITTLE-MP-scheduler-patchset-13.11-lsk.tar.bz2.  This package may be used directly by partners interested in porting the big.LITTLE MP scheduler functionality to their custom platform. Please contact "ARM support":mailto:support-sw@arm.com?subject=Query%20about%20ARM%20big.LITTLE%20MP%20patchset%20package in case of any queries related to this package.

Also provided is optional configurable kernel support for an implementation of ARM's Power State Co-ordination Interface (PSCI). This support is disabled by default. To use PSCI support you will require secure firmware that is currently available to ARM licensees upon request to ARM. Please contact "ARM support":mailto:support-sw@arm.com?subject=Access%20to%20PSCI to get access to the firmware code.

The recently-added small task packing functionality is disabled in the kernel configuration. Documentation for this feature is available at Documentation/arm/small-task-packing.txt. This release adds an optimization for migrating non-running tasks between HMP domains and a new file /sys/kernel/hmp/hmp_domains which exposes the HMP domains in use by the scheduler to userspace applications.

h3. Scheduler modifications to support big.LITTLE

The following patches make up the big.LITTLE MP patchset. 

| "sched: implement usage tracking":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=0841c6ae0b53d43e4634cf4a1f88407b93c15399 | |
| "sched: entity load-tracking load_avg_ratio":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=be6ef1d56e70bfdfd79174d7d23a4b12d5b911ee | |
| "sched: Task placement for heterogeneous systems based on task load-tracking":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=798e82cab1a39f4d75796be024c4d7b08bc062e8 | |
| "sched: Forced task migration on heterogeneous systems":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=2dd22b22c95851445c189c3d4708c027aa19cf5f | |
| "sched: Introduce priority-based task migration filter":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=943106d9437fcced79c4e48ed794410e5f750b4c | |
| "ARM: Add HMP scheduling support for ARM architecture":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=d278bb1c4d5191e0d9b9911337e3b31a100a7f9f | |
| "ARM: sched: Use device-tree to provide fast/slow CPU list for HMP":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=dc68bd92107d8990f4608d8f42744770fe203f7f | |
| "ARM: sched: Setup SCHED_HMP domains":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=1baaccf456ece33b8fa02f8cdf3977d6a95b393c | |
| "sched: Add ftrace events for entity load-tracking":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=b9d3d5612899de4f8372ecfbc4c8f4ba5aa170ec | |
| "sched: Add HMP task migration ftrace event":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=0d811e649ad31994e8f06b6b18101f249b34e912 | |
| "sched: SCHED_HMP multi-domain task migration control":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=76525733b4f4e0fdcc188dfe23941024ae626979 | |
| "sched: Enable HMP priority filter by default":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=1b8ae251638844173bd04a4c9e543581f3d92fbd | |
| "ARM: sched: Avoid empty 'slow' HMP domain":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=362036513b1dff299b2035d5b928a203742b98d7 | |
| "sched: Only down migrate low priority tasks if allowed by affinity mask":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=eeebbf595c8dcd6392537c4d13b8cda78001f4e5 | |
| "sched: fix arch_get_fast_and_slow_cpus to get logical cpumask correctly":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=a9f9bca843e44144670c660638274363f34b9847 | |
| "sched: Do not ignore grouped tasks during HMP forced migration.":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=d2c920023cbc456414f8e07ff253a89be535b41b | |
| "sched: Ignore offline CPUs in HMP migration & load stats":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=b64cc6f7e54b97536dbecc05d193b31b27feecf1 | |
| "ARM: Change load tracking scale using sysfs":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=0e48eed05c47aa2e00b772a519b36286e466621e | |
| "ARM: Experimental Frequency-Invariant Load Scaling Patch":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=71b5dbd6d527d5de8aaef7e1f8658df95caf28aa | |
| "ARM: Fix build breakage when big.LITTLE.conf is not used.":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=ae570aeb1d40d531a498e53e2a815a52996f0749 | |
| "sched: Basic global balancing support for HMP":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=cf71912f481c7b6fc39e9b2021e8f9c058116c26 | |
| "sched: cfs.nr_running does not contain the intended metric":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=7e6446630039fcbabb9582ebefdcbc30de32c0e2 | |
| "Revert sched: Enable HMP priority filter by default":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=7362251d8a422dcba5c56408b92fc2b6ad03b10c | |
| "HMP: Use unweighted load for hmp migration decisions":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=ede58a69a32b187899e6cccbbd299a04d3f50b71 | |
| "HMP: Select least-loaded CPU when performing HMP Migrations":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=08d7db89a214a138516419a85e17272b09180abd | |
| "HMP: Avoid multiple calls to hmp_domain_min_load in fast path":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=3f3b210703f80fe60dbfa13c25b30d4effbf9f4b | |
| "HMP: Force new non-kernel tasks onto big CPUs until load stabilises":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=954978dd2cff81cc15745b9e581a1709e238f8ef | |
| "sched: Restrict nohz balance kicks to stay in the HMP domain":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=6eada0087366d8aec6bc38348a68f721f538cc5c | |
| "HMP: experimental: Force all rt tasks to start on little domain":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=4ab2679351e9566a6b0822f2d841a902758ba066 | |
| "HMP: select 'best' task for migration rather than 'current'":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=ee52487aaf659ef630ce3371de0e59944253581b | |
| "sched: HMP fix traversing the rb-tree from the curr pointer":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=aaba2453951b3743d003be228102e1da63c75326 | |
| "sched: track per-rq 'last migration time'":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=5fad81c7739db3a1fc6380dcc3d7902666ed5ee8 | |
| "HMP: Modify the runqueue stats to add a new child stat":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=b98cd6acc86f2c3bc10902476836746727b73ba9 | |
| "HMP: Explicitly implement all-load-is-max-load policy for HMP targets":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=6b695bd8a4e2c86cc466010517c0260dc3653742 | |
| "sched: HMP change nr_running offload metric":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=1f435579ea80d4639061435d8337df5a2c92e530 | |
| "HMP: Implement idle pull for HMP":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=db20b7088c6d7f7920dace95c7fc8d9955650214 | |
| "HMP: Access runqueue task clocks directly.":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=de66e01565848d0236ca9e7e9e2f6ecd5c27a021 | |
| "HMP: Update migration timer when we fork-migrate":https://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=18e3c3d2cc1346cb7cc2e3fd777b2c6f4fbb6135 | |
| "sched: HMP: Change default HMP thresholds":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=d73babce9a77f8143136fe0d7b6c1ae44b5652dc |<div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |
| "sched: HMP: Additional trace points for debugging HMP":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=7b8e0b3f2af55b1ffb5c10be1daa59d8dc21d140 | <div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |
| "arm: ipi raise/start/end tracing":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=2353c1f8009c14e89b323b18ae246c485fc034e4 | <div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |
| "smp: smp_cross_call function pointer tracing":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=5ecaba3d9f4ab514fe8d383534e24b306f116896 | <div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |
| "sched: HMP: fix potential logical errors":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=2e14ecb254a3eaa2993b5dd04014f41e1d6188ce | <div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |
| "hmp: Remove potential for task_struct access race":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=cd5c2cc93d3dc581a19c62442f40895500d2a34c | <div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |
| "HMP: Implement task packing for small tasks in HMP":http://git.linaro.org/gitweb?p=kernel/linux-linaro-stable.git;a=commit;h=d8063e7015122eb3f6173acf496171def8941734 | <div style="color:white;background-color:green">New in this release</div> |

h3. Platform Support. 

In addition to the big.LITTLE MP work the TC2 platform support includes:
** TC2: reset CPUs spuriously woken up on cluster power up
** vexpress: add shim layer for psci backend on TC2
** vexpress: allow native pm ops backends to probe for psci suppport
** psci: add cmdline option to enable use of psci
** psci: add probe function to discover presence of a psci implementation
** psci: convert psci '-EALREADYON' error code to linux '-EAGAIN'
** vexpress: add psci support in TC2 device tree
** psci: add constants to specify affinity levels
** TC2: replace hard coded cluster and cpu values with constants
** TC2: use generic accessors to extract cpu and cluster ids
** CPUidle & CPUfreq support
** hwmon driver allowing, amongst other things, TC2's power, current and energy measurements to be read through standard sysfs interfaces
** Common clocks implementation
** Regulator driver
** Drivers for previously hard-coded configuration interfaces
** Support self-hosted debugging through idle
** In addition to the CPU PMUs the perf framework supports the CCI-400 PMUs
** A patch from Thomas Gliexner which supports a IRQ affinity mask being specified in the command line. This can be used to reduce unnecessary IRQ wakeups on Cortex-A15. For instructions see the irqaffinity entry in Documentation/kernel-parameters.txt
** arm-multi_pmu_v2 - enables the use of multiple PMU types or sources, for example profiling across both Cortex-A15 and Cortex-A7 clusters and getting results for CCI. 

h2. Where To Find More Information

More information on Linaro can be found on our "website.":http://www.linaro.org/

h2. Feedback and Support

Subscribe to the important Linaro mailing lists and join our IRC channels to stay on top of Linaro development.

** Linaro Development "mailing list":http://lists.linaro.org/mailman/listinfo/linaro-dev
** Linaro IRC channel on irc.freenode.net at @#linaro@

* Landing Team bug reports should be filed in "JIRA":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM#selectedTab=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.project%3Aissues-panel by clicking on the "Create issue" button on the top menu bar.
** You will need to login to your JIRA account.  If you do not have an account or are having problems, email its@linaro.org for help.
* More general bug reports should be filed in Launchpad against the individual packages that are affected. If a suitable package cannot be identified, feel free to assign them to "Linaro project":http://bugs.launchpad.net/linaro/+filebug.
* Questions? "ask Linaro":http://ask.linaro.org/.
* Interested in commercial support? inquire at "Linaro support":mailto:support@linaro.org

h2. Resolved in this release

* "ARM-23":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-23 LP:1129005 - Intermitent failure of LTP shmat01 testcase
* "ARM-35":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-35 Warning in kmalloc_slab when running Android on RTSM
* "ARM-45":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-45 cpu_hotplug_latency_with_load/without_load failed to get trace
* "ARM-49":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-49 Vexpress-tc2 linaro 13.05 segfaults when cluster DTS node is removed 
* "ARM-54":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-54 No audio on ARM Versatile Express A9 ALIP image
* "ARM-55":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-55 HTML5 video playback failed, using Chromium but works with Firefox, on ARM Versatile Express ALIP image
* "LP: #1042755":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1042755 TC2: powertop doesn't show correct frequency stats

h2. Known Issues

h3. General Issues

* "ARM-16":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-16 LP:1097309 - serial console doesn't received characters on TC2
* "ARM-24":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-24 LP:1172350 - Audio playback under Android JellyBean stops sporadically on TC2 with release 13.03
* "ARM-46":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-46 Booting using UEFI with bootmon from VE CD 5.2 fails
* "ARM-50":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-50 perf shows zero for cycle and instruction counts on TC2
* "ARM-52":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-52 hrtimer issues with TC2 on Linaro 13.06
* "ARM-53":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-53 Watchdog timeout booting Android on single core fastmodels

h3. Known Issues due to lack of video acceleration

* "LP: #987155":https://launchpad.net/bugs/987155 vexpress: Angrybirds display severely truncated
* "LP: #987172":https://launchpad.net/bugs/987172 vexpress: YouTube video playback fails

h3. Known Issues due to generic Android features

* "ARM-51":http://cards.linaro.org/browse/ARM-51 Gallery app crashes on start on vexpress Android 4.3

h3. Known Issues due to generic features

* "LP: #1231468":https://launchpad.net/bugs/1231468 HTML5 video playback failed, using Chromium but works with Firefox, on ARM Versatile Express ALIP image 

h3. Additional information

NOTE: When using the interactive governor with Android, take care to use the following values for governor specific tunables. These values have been selected after careful analysis on this LSK version and result in optimal power-performance on TC2. In future LSK releases, additional system initialisation logic will use these values as defaults.

Interactive settings for the Cortex-A7 cluster:

'above_hispeed_delay': 20000
'go_hispeed_load': 85
'hispeed_freq': 800000
'min_sample_time': 80000
'timer_rate': 20000

Interactive settings for the Cortex-A15 cluster:

'above_hispeed_delay': 20000
'go_hispeed_load': 85
'hispeed_freq': 1000000
'min_sample_time': 80000
'timer_rate': 20000
