This release was boot tested on FVP A15x4 and A15x4-A7x4 models. No rigorous testing was carried out. This build is expected to run on other models.  No UEFI binary exists for A15-A7 models; in this case, the A15 binary can be used, but the A7 CPUs will not be available

h2. Prerequisites

* Install the model(s) you wish to run. You must have a valid license and the environment set up to run models
* Install "Linaro image tools":https://wiki.linaro.org/Linaro-Image-Tools
* Install kpartx which you can get by issuing the following command in your terminal

bc. sudo apt-get install kpartx

Linaro OpemEmbedded images are made up of two components. The "Hardware Pack":https://wiki.linaro.org/HardwarePacks, which contains the kernel, boot loader and/or Device Tree blob and a Root file system (RootFS) of your choice to generate an image.

h3. Install Linaro Image Tools

There are multiple ways you can get the latest Linaro Image Tools:

** Method 1: Install them from the Linaro Image Tools "PPA":https://launchpad.net/~linaro-maintainers/+archive/tools

bc. sudo add-apt-repository ppa:linaro-maintainers/tools
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install linaro-image-tools

** Method 2: Building from source

bc. wget http://releases.linaro.org/13.12/components/platform/linaro-image-tools/linaro-image-tools-2013.12.tar.gz

h2. Create a 2GB image file

Fast Models will only deal with file systems up to 2GB in size, however the if the pre-built image may be larger.  In this case, you can build your own image using the pre-built artifacts as listed below.

Using the following command, you will download the RootFS, the hardware pack.

bc. wget http://releases.linaro.org/13.12/openembedded/vexpress-lsk/hwpack_linaro-lsk-vexpress_${DATE}-${HWPACKNUM}_armhf_supported.tar.gz
wget https://releases.linaro.org/13.12/openembedded/vexpress-lsk/linaro-image-alip-genericarmv7a-${DATE}-${IMAGENUM}.rootfs.tar.gz

Now you need to create the image using the following commands.

bc. linaro-media-create --image-file linaro.img --image-size 2000M --dev vexpress --hwpack hwpack_linaro-lsk-vexpress_*_armhf_supported.tar.gz --binary linaro-image-alip-genericarmv7a-*.rootfs.tar.gz

bc. sudo kpartx -a linaro.img
mkdir boot
sudo mount /dev/mapper/loop0p1 boot
cp boot/uImage .
cp boot/uInitrd .
cp -ar boot/rtsm rtsm
sudo umount boot
sudo kpartx -d linaro.img

note: unless you use kpartx to delete the loop mappings as above, even if you update linaro.img and re-mount it, it will not refresh and you will end up using the old image.

h2. Run Fast Models with UEFI

The instructions for running UEFI on the various models are very similar.  The two differences are the UEFI binary and the model used.  Follow the model specific instruction below, then proceed to the generic instructions in the section "Run the model with UEFI".

h3. Run A9x4 model with UEFI

bc. MODEL=/usr/local/DS-5/bin/FVP_VE_Cortex-A9_MPx4
UEFI=boot/rtsm/uefi_rtsm_ve-ca9x4.bin

h3. Run A15x1 model with UEFI

bc. MODEL=$HOME/ARM/models/Linux64_GCC-4.1/FVP_VE_Cortex-A15x1
UEFI=boot/rtsm/uefi_rtsm_ve-ca15.bin

h3. Run A15x2 model with UEFI

bc. MODEL=$HOME/ARM/models/Linux64_GCC-4.1/FVP_VE_Cortex-A15x2
UEFI=boot/rtsm/uefi_rtsm_ve-ca15.bin

h3. Run A15x4 model with UEFI

bc. MODEL=$HOME/ARM/models/Linux64_GCC-4.1/FVP_VE_Cortex-A15x4
UEFI=boot/rtsm/uefi_rtsm_ve-ca15.bin

h3. Run the model with UEFI

bc. MMC=linaro.img
UEFI_VARS=$HOME/uefi-vars.fd
touch $UEFI_VARS # create the file if it doesn't already exist

bc. $MODEL \
-C motherboard.flashloader0.fname=$UEFI \
-C motherboard.flashloader1.fname=$UEFI_VARS \
-C motherboard.flashloader1.fnameWrite=$UEFI_VARS \
-C motherboard.mmc.p_mmc_file=$MMC \
-C motherboard.pl011_uart0.unbuffered_output=true \
-C motherboard.smsc_91c111.enabled=1 \
-C motherboard.hostbridge.userNetworking=1

